documentation/design/configurable-permissions.adoc, before:

= Configurable Permissions

== The problem
* All permissions hardcoded to roles
** All instances of Timbuctoo have the same permissions for the same roles

=== User Roles
* __**L0: Anonymous user**__: only published datasets
* *L1: Reader - datasets*: both all published + spec. assigned datasets
* *L2: Contributor - datasets*: both all published + spec. assigned datasets
* *L3: Editor - datasets*: both all published + spec. assigned datasets
* *L4: Administrator - datasets*: both all published + spec. assigned datasets
* __**L5: Site administrator**__: Timbuctoo instance
** The super users of the instances, these should be configured with a system administrator

The list above is an example to give an impression what could be possible.
Though every application will have multiple _Anonymous users_ and one or more _Site administrators_.

=== Actions
GraphQL

* Create a new data set
* Edit dataset metadata
* Update resourcesync
* Delete a data set
* Edit existing data
* Change view config for the GUI
* Change search config for the GUI
* Publish an unpublished data set
* Promote a published data set
* Change collection metadata
* Change the schema of a collection / data set
* Read data of non-published data set via GraphQL
* Resourcesync
** Import initial data
** Synchronize with remote
* Delete specific data fom a data set [Future]
* Add new data to a data set [Future]

REST / HTTP

* Upload RDF
** Upload initial data
** Upload an update of the data
* Read resourcesync of a non-published data set
* Read resourcesync of a published data set

Other / unknown

* Give users permission to data set [Future]
* Limit the users that can create new data sets [Future]
* Configure user roles [Future] (This might be done by the system administrator)

== Definition of done
* The owner of the Timbuctoo instance can assign all the permissions to roles of her of his liking.
* All permissions are defined in the code.
* Make it possible for each instance of TImbuctoo to have its own user roles.
* Allow multiple implementations.
** Create a filesystem based implementation
* GraphQL should list permission of a single person


== Structure

----
+------+                +------+           +------------+           +-----------+
|      |*          1...*|      |*     1...*|            |1         1|           |
| User +--------------->+ Role +---------->+ Permission +---------->+ Operation |
|      |                |      |           |            |           |           |
+------+                +------+           +------------+           +-----------+
----

== Steps
. Identify the actions Timbuctoo needs limited accessibility.
.. Give each action its own permission.
.. Add checks for the specific actions.
. Make the permissions configurable.
.. Make a matrix where the user roles can be connected to the authorized actions
. Design a default Timbuctoo user roles to support the current instances of Timbuctoo
.. Make the current implementations work with the new schema, without any functionality changes
. Add a migration from the old to the new structure.
. Let legacy Timbuctoo use new Permissions

== Code changes
The first two code changes are  refactoring that will remove a lot of duplication and will make the code on a lot of places a bit more readable.
Method added because getPermissions is only used like `getPermissions(user, dataset).contains(Permission.WRITE)`
[source, java]
----
public interface PermissionFetcher {
  ...
  boolean hasPermission(User user, DataSetMetaData dataSetMetadata) throws PermissionFetchingException;
  ...
}
----
Method added because getPermissions is only used like `getPermissions(user, dataset).contains(Permission.WRITE)`
[source, java]
----
public class UserPermissionCheck {
  ...
  public boolean hasPermission(User user, DataSetMetaData dataSetMetadata) {
  ...
  }
  ...
}
----

There need to be an object that is going to translate the roles to the interface should look like this:
[source, java]
----
public interface RoleToPermissionTranslator {
  Set<Permission> getPermissionsForRoles(Collection<String> roles);
}
----


== Links
How To Structure Permissions In A SaaS App: https://heapanalytics.com/blog/engineering/structure-permissions-saas-app

Commit message:

Update default roles for each Timbuctoo instance

documentation/design/configurable-permissions.adoc, after:

= Configurable Permissions

== The problem
* All permissions hardcoded to roles
** All instances of Timbuctoo have the same permissions for the same roles

=== User Roles
* __**L0: Anonymous user**__: only published datasets
* *L1: Reader - datasets*: both all published + spec. assigned datasets
* *L2: Contributor - datasets*: both all published + spec. assigned datasets
* *L3: Editor - datasets*: both all published + spec. assigned datasets
* *L4: Administrator - datasets*: both all published + spec. assigned datasets
* __**L5: Site administrator**__: Timbuctoo instance
** The super users of the instances, these should be configured with a system administrator

The list above is an example to give an impression what could be possible.
Though every application will have multiple _Anonymous users_ and one or more _Site administrators_.
Another role that will be in every instance is the _data set administrator_.

=== Actions
GraphQL

* Create a new data set
* Edit dataset metadata
* Update resourcesync
* Delete a data set
* Edit existing data
* Change view config for the GUI
* Change search config for the GUI
* Publish an unpublished data set
* Promote a published data set
* Change collection metadata
* Change the schema of a collection / data set
* Read data of non-published data set via GraphQL
* Resourcesync
** Import initial data
** Synchronize with remote
* Delete specific data fom a data set [Future]
* Add new data to a data set [Future]

REST / HTTP

* Upload RDF
** Upload initial data
** Upload an update of the data
* Read resourcesync of a non-published data set
* Read resourcesync of a published data set

Other / unknown

* Give users permission to data set [Future]
* Limit the users that can create new data sets [Future]
* Configure user roles [Future] (This might be done by the system administrator)

== Definition of done
* The owner of the Timbuctoo instance can assign all the permissions to roles of her of his liking.
* All permissions are defined in the code.
* Make it possible for each instance of TImbuctoo to have its own user roles.
* Allow multiple implementations.
** Create a filesystem based implementation
* GraphQL should list permission of a single person


== Structure

----
+------+                +------+           +------------+           +-----------+
|      |*          1...*|      |*     1...*|            |1         1|           |
| User +--------------->+ Role +---------->+ Permission +---------->+ Operation |
|      |                |      |           |            |           |           |
+------+                +------+           +------------+           +-----------+
----

== Steps
. Identify the actions Timbuctoo needs limited accessibility.
.. Give each action its own permission.
.. Add checks for the specific actions.
. Make the permissions configurable.
.. Make a matrix where the user roles can be connected to the authorized actions
. Design a default Timbuctoo user roles to support the current instances of Timbuctoo
.. Make the current implementations work with the new schema, without any functionality changes
. Add a migration from the old to the new structure.
. Let legacy Timbuctoo use new Permissions

== Code changes
The first two code changes are  refactoring that will remove a lot of duplication and will make the code on a lot of places a bit more readable.
Method added because getPermissions is only used like `getPermissions(user, dataset).contains(Permission.WRITE)`
[source, java]
----
public interface PermissionFetcher {
  ...
  boolean hasPermission(User user, DataSetMetaData dataSetMetadata) throws PermissionFetchingException;
  ...
}
----
Method added because getPermissions is only used like `getPermissions(user, dataset).contains(Permission.WRITE)`
[source, java]
----
public class UserPermissionCheck {
  ...
  public boolean hasPermission(User user, DataSetMetaData dataSetMetadata) {
  ...
  }
  ...
}
----

There need to be an object that is going to translate the roles to the interface should look like this:
[source, java]
----
public interface RoleToPermissionTranslator {
  Set<Permission> getPermissionsForRoles(Collection<String> roles);
}
----


== Links
How To Structure Permissions In A SaaS App: https://heapanalytics.com/blog/engineering/structure-permissions-saas-app
